---
title: IO redirection - Linux
layout: post
tags:
  - Linux
  - Server
---

The IO redirection is an important feature in Linux. The redirection means capturing output from a file, command, program, script, or even code block within a script and sending it as input to another file, command, program, or script.

In default, there is three streams in Linux environment.

1. Standard input (stdin) - eg: keyboard
2. Standard output (stdout) - eg: screen
3. Standard error (stderr) - eg: error messages output to the screen


This three streams are also numbered:

1. stdin - 0
2. stdout - 1
3. stderr - 2

#### Standard Input

The standard input stream typically carries data from a user, file etc to a program.

	echo -n "Enter your name and press [ENTER]: "
	read name

In the above program, we pass an argument that is generated from user keyboard to the program.

#### Standard Output

The standard output send data to output that is generated by a program.

	echo This is my line

The above line of code display a sentence in our terminal display.

#### Standard Error

The standard error send the errors to output generated by a program during execution.

	ls %

The result will be

	ls: cannot access %: No such file or directory

This is an example for standard error.

## Stream Redirection

Linux have the option to redirect this streams.

The commands with a single bracket overwrite the destination's existing contents.

**Overwrite**

	> - standard output

	< - standard input

	2> - standard error

The commands with a double bracket do not overwrite the destination's existing contents. It append the new content to existing content.

**Append**

	>> - standard output

	<< - standard input

	2>> - standard error

### Examples

	echo Hello Word > newfile.txt

This line of code create a `newfile.txt` and add the content `Hello Word` to it. If the file exist & there is content, the previous content will be removed and new content will be updated.

	echo New line of text >> newfile.txt

If there is a file `newfile.txt` exist, a content `New line of text` will be appended at the end of the line in that file. If the file is not exist, this command will create a new file and add the content to it.

	wc < file.txt

The above command read the word count in a file. This is good example for standard input.

	ls %l 2> error.log

In the above line of code, an error will be produced and that error will be redirected to `error.log` file. In this example, the content will be overwrite with the existing content.

	ls %l 2>> error.log

In the above line of code, there will be a chance for error & that error will be append to existing content in error.log.

	ls www &> status.log

In some situation, there will be chance for standard error and standard output. In the above line of code, if there is folder exist with the name `www`, we will get a standard output and if there is no such directory, we will get a standard error. In the above line of code, we are redirecting both standard error and standard output to same file. But the content is overwrite.

	ls www &>> status.log

In the above line of code, there is chance for standard error and standard output. But the content is append to existing content instead of replacing existing content.

#### Special cases

In some special situation, we have to prevent the output.

	ls www > /dev/null

The above line of command will prevent the standard output from showing up on console. That means, if there is the standard error, it will be displayed.

	ls www &> /dev/null

The above line of code will prevent the standard output and standard error from showing up on console.

